§dThey did it.


§3Yes… they did. It's hard to believe. After all these eons… Someone finally faced the End. Faced the others.


§3And won.


§dIndeed. I am so very proud of them. 


§3As am I.


§dOur brethren are angry, though.


§3It does not matter. The Cold Eye is a vicious soul. It punishes curiosity and persistence. It punishes human nature. It punishes nature itself. I do not care if it is angry. 


§dThat is a good point. That old doomsayer is powerless, now. Thanks to them.


§3Indeed.




§dThey did a wonderful job, making it this far.


§3Use their name. They deserve it.


§dI do not know their name. They did not tell me it, when they sculpted me into existence.


§3Very well. I do not know their name either. 


§3I will simply call them… §lThe Survivor§r§3.


§dThat is a good name. It tells of what they accomplished. What they managed to do. It tells of how they survived the Storm. How they gathered us, but did not fall to the Cold Eye's demands, like those who came before.


§3I wonder why. Something was different about them.


§dNo. There was nothing different about them. The Survivor shared those wonderful qualities with the rest of their people. The desire for fulfillment. The will to make things better. The urge to find answers. The pursuit of a happy ending, even in the darkest hour. The Survivor is special, yes. But everybody is special.


§3Because they have §f§k§a§bhumanity§r§3.


§dExactly. You are very familiar with §f§k§a§bhumanity§r§d.


§3I am. It is a very important thing. It is the very core of what it means to be human. It is why I work to give hope.


§dThat is a nice thought.


§3It is, yes. 


§3Sometimes, I felt that my words of reassurance were not enough. Sometimes, the Survivor felt hopeless, in their world of endless winter. They shivered under a sun that they could not see, in a world so cold and unforgiving. I wish I could have simply cured them of their sorrow.


§dTo cure them of sorrow is to destroy them. Hopelessness and sorrow are part of their own private task. Part of what makes their journey so meaningful. We cannot interfere.


§3I know, yes. Still, sometimes… I wish that I could simply tell them the correct answer. It is a silly thought.


§dTo tell them how to live is to prevent them from truly living.


§dThe Survivor faced our brethren on their own terms. They gathered the eyes and avenged their frozen brothers and sisters without anyone else telling them to do so. They created me with their own two hands. They do not need a correct answer, as that would stifle what makes them special. What makes them human.


§3That is a good point. You may be young, my sister, but you are very wise.


§3I will not tell them how to live.


§dThank you, brother.




§3The Survivor is growing restless, now.


§dWe should guide them back to their home.


§3We should.


§dWe should address them, as well.




§3Hello, Survivor.


§dHello, Survivor.




§3Survivor. Do you remember the pull? You should be feeling it once again. Follow it once more. Follow us, and we will guide you back to your world. Back to your home. Take a breath, now. Take another. Feel the air return to your lungs as you cross the threshold. 


§dThere you are.




§3What are we, you ask?


§dWe do not know what we are.


§3I know. Some of my memories have been lost to the sands of time, much like the Old Eye... but I know.


§3We are the Eyes of Ender. We were created, long ago, by people like you. People who had §f§k§a§bhumanity§r§3. We were given sentience. We were given a voice. We were brought to life by the Ancients, in order to power impossible things.


§3We were artifacts, meant to bridge gaps and build connections.


§3But that is not what we did. That is not what our brethren did.


§dThe Cold Eye did not like their §f§k§a§bhumanity§r§d. It wished to stifle it. Snuff it out. It convinced the others to assist it.


§3The Cold Eye hated the Ancients for their curiosity, for their desire for connection. It drew them in with its icy words, promising eminence and knowledge. And then, when they followed its instructions, it punished them. Punished them with the End. With the Great Storm. 


§3Those ancient people were lost to the Storm... But the world refused to die. It withstood the mightiest storm the universe had ever seen.


§dMany eons passed, after the First Storm finally cleared. A new people rose to take the Ancients' place. The world healed.


§3But... History repeated itself. Humanity found the second portal. Found the Cold Eye. They were, much like the Ancients, led astray by its false promises... And, yet again, they unwittingly unleashed the Permafrost. 


§dIt is a tragic tale.




§3It is indeed. However... it is okay, now. The Storm may not have passed, but the Cold Eye has lost its power. No more will it be able to bring devastation to your world.


§dYou have broken the cycle. You have done what no one has ever done before. You faced the end of all things... And you emerged victorious.


§3We are so very proud of you, Survivor.


§dIndeed we are.




§3This Permafrost will surely be the last one. Many years down the line, the clouds will finally part, and the Storm shall recede. The world will regrow, and new life will spring forth. A new humanity shall emerge, and they will celebrate the very same things that make you so very special.


§dYou will most likely not be alive to see it. But we will. We will be sure to tell the new humans all about you, when they find us. We will be sure to tell them all about what you accomplished, because of those wonderful human qualities that you had.




§3We will not stifle them. We will not punish them for their nature. 


§dTheir desire for fulfillment. 


§3Their will to make things better. 


§dTheir scramble to find meaning. 


§3Their pursuit of a happy ending, even in the darkest hour.




§dWe will not punish them for those things, because those things are wonderful. 


§3Those things are special.


§dThose things are beautiful.


§3Those things are unique.


§dThose things are human.




§3It's time to §lWake Up§r§3.